.TH LIKWID-MPIRUN 1 <DATE> likwid\-<VERSION>
.SH NAME
likwid-mpirun \- A tool to start and monitor MPI applications with LIKWID
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B likwid-memsweeper
.RB [\-hd]
.RB [ \-hostfile
.IR filename ]
.RB [ \-nperdomain
.IR number_of_processes_in_domain ]
.RB [ \-pin
.IR expression ]
.RB [ \-omp
.IR expression ]
.RB [ \-mpi
.IR expression ]
.RB [\-\-]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B likwid-mpirun
is a command line application that wraps the vendor-specific mpirun tool and adds calls to
.B likwid-perfctr(1)
to the execution string. The user-given application is ran, measured and the results returned to the staring node.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-h
prints a help message to standard output, then exits.
.TP
.B \-d
prints debug messages to standard output.
.TP
.B \-\^hostfile " filename
specifies the nodes to schedule the MPI processes on
.TP
.B \-\^nperdomain " number_of_processes_in_domain
specifies the processes per affinity domain (see
.B likwid-pin
for info about affinity domains)
.TP
.B \-\^pin " expression
specifies the pinning for hybrid execution (see
.B likwid-pin
for info about affinity domains)
.TP
.B \-\^omp " expression
enables hybrid setup. Can only be used in combination with
.B -pin.
The only possible value is: intel
.TP
.B \-\^mpi " expression
specifies the MPI implementation that should be used by the wrapper. Possible values are intelmpi, openmpi and mvapich2
.TP
.B \-\-
stops parsing arguments for likwid-mpirun, in order to set options for underlying MPI implementation after \-\-.

.SH EXAMPLE
.IP 1. 4
For standard application:
.TP
.B likwid-mpirun -np 32  ./myApp
.PP
Will run 32 MPI processes, each host is filled with as much processes as written in ppn
.IP 2. 4
With pinning:
.TP
.B likwid-mpirun -np 32 -nperdomain S:2  ./myApp
.PP
Will start 32 MPI processes with 2 processes per socket.
.IP 3. 4
For hybrid runs:
.TP
.B likwid-mpirun -np 32 -pin M0:0-3_M1:0-3  ./myApp
.PP
Will start 32 MPI processes with 2 processes per node. Threads of the first process are pinned to the cores 0-3 in NUMA domain 0 (M0). The OpenMP threads of the second process are pinned to the first four cores in NUMA domain 1 (M1)


.SH AUTHOR
Written by Thomas Roehl <thomas.roehl@gmail.com>.
.SH BUGS
Report Bugs on <http://code.google.com/p/likwid/issues/list>.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
likwid-pin(1), likwid-perfctr(1), likwid-features(1), likwid-powermeter(1), likwid-topology(1),
