.TH LIKWID-MPIRUN 1 <DATE> likwid\-<VERSION>
.SH NAME
likwid-mpirun \- A tool to start and monitor MPI applications with LIKWID
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B likwid-memsweeper
.RB [\-hvdOm]
.RB [ \-n
.IR number_of_processes ]
.RB [ \-hostfile
.IR filename ]
.RB [ \-nperdomain
.IR number_of_processes_in_domain ]
.RB [ \-pin
.IR expression ]
.RB [ \-omp
.IR omptype ]
.RB [ \-mpi
.IR mpitype ]
.RB [ \-g
.IR eventset ]
.RB [\-\-]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B likwid-mpirun
is a command line application that wraps the vendor-specific mpirun tool and adds calls to
.B likwid-perfctr(1)
to the execution string. The user-given application is ran, measured and the results returned to the staring node.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\^h,\-\-\^help
prints a help message to standard output, then exits
.TP
.B \-\^v,\-\-\^version
prints version information to standard output, then exits
.TP
.B \-\^d,\-\-\^debug
prints debug messages to standard output
.TP
.B \-\^n,\-\^np,\-\-\^n,\-\-\^np <number_of_processes>
specifies how many MPI processes should be started
.TP
.B \-\^hostfile <filename>
specifies the nodes to schedule the MPI processes on
.TP
.B \-\^nperdomain <number_of_processes_in_domain>
specifies the processes per affinity domain (see
.B likwid-pin
for info about affinity domains)
.TP
.B \-\^pin <expression>
specifies the pinning for hybrid execution (see
.B likwid-pin
for info about affinity domains)
.TP
.B \-\^s, \-\-\^skip <mask>
Specify skip mask as HEX number. For each set bit the corresponding thread is skipped.
.TP
.B \-\^omp <omptype>
enables hybrid setup. Likwid tries to determine OpenMP type automatically. The only possible value are
.B intel
and
.B gnu
.TP
.B \-\^mpi <mpitype>
specifies the MPI implementation that should be used by the wrapper. Possible values are
.B intelmpi, openmpi
and
.B mvapich2
.TP
.B \-\^m,\-\-\^marker
activates the Marker API for the executed MPI processes
.TP
.B \-\^O
prints output in CSV not ASCII tables
.TP
.B \-\-
stops parsing arguments for likwid-mpirun, in order to set options for underlying MPI implementation after \-\-.

.SH EXAMPLE
.IP 1. 4
For standard application:
.TP
.B likwid-mpirun -np 32 ./myApp
.PP
Will run 32 MPI processes, each host is filled with as much processes as written in ppn
.IP 2. 4
With pinning:
.TP
.B likwid-mpirun -np 32 -nperdomain S:2 ./myApp
.PP
Will start 32 MPI processes with 2 processes per socket.
.IP 3. 4
For hybrid runs:
.TP
.B likwid-mpirun -np 32 -pin M0:0-3_M1:0-3 ./myApp
.PP
Will start 32 MPI processes with 2 processes per node. Threads of the first process are pinned to the cores 0-3 in NUMA domain 0 (M0). The OpenMP threads of the second process are pinned to the first four cores in NUMA domain 1 (M1)


.SH AUTHOR
Written by Thomas Roehl <thomas.roehl@googlemail.com>.
.SH BUGS
Report Bugs on <http://code.google.com/p/likwid/issues/list>.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
likwid-pin(1), likwid-perfctr(1), likwid-powermeter(1)
