.TH LIKWID-PERFCTR 1 <DATE> likwid\-<VERSION>
.SH NAME
likwid-perfctr \- configure and read out hardware performance counters on x86 cpus
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B likwid-perfctr 
.RB [\-vhHVmaeiMoO]
.RB [ \-c/\-C
.IR <core_list> ]
.RB [ \-g
.IR <performance_group>
or
.IR <performance_event_string> ]
.RB [ \-t
.IR <frequency> ]
.RB [ \-S
.IR <time> ]
.RB [ \-s
.IR <skip_mask> ]
.RB [ \-o
.IR <output_file> ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B likwid-perfctr
is a lightweight command line application to configure and read out hardware performance monitoring data
on supported x86 processors. It can measure either as wrapper without changing the measured application
or with marker API functions inside the code, which will turn on and off the counters. There are preconfigured
groups with useful event sets and derived metrics. Additonally arbitrary events can be measured with
custom event sets. The marker API can measure mulitple named regions. Results are accumulated on multiple calls.
The following x86 processors are supported:
.IP \[bu] 
.B Intel Core 2:
all variants. Counters:
.I PMC[0-1], FIXC[0-2]
.IP \[bu] 
.B Intel Nehalem:
Counters:
.I PMC[0-3], FIXC[0-2], UPMC[0-7]
.IP \[bu] 
.B Intel Nehalem EX:
Counters:
.I PMC[0-3], FIXC[0-2], MBOX[0-1]C[0-5], BBOX[0-1]C[0-3], RBOX[0-1]C[0-7], WBOX[0-5], UBOX0, SBOX[0-1]C[0-3], CBOX[0-9]C[0-4]
.IP \[bu] 
.B Intel Westmere:
 Counters:
.I PMC[0-3], FIXC[0-2], UPMC[0-7]
.IP \[bu] 
.B Intel Westmere EX:
Counters:
.I PMC[0-3], FIXC[0-2], MBOX[0-1]C[0-5], BBOX[0-1]C[0-3], RBOX[0-1]C[0-7], WBOX[0-5], UBOX0, SBOX[0-1]C[0-3], CBOX[0-9]C[0-4]
.IP \[bu] 
.B Intel Sandy Bridge:
full RAPL support. Counters:
.I PMC[0-3], FIXC[0-2], PWR[0-3]
.IP \[bu] 
.B Intel Sandy Bridge EP:
partial support for uncore, full RAPL support. Counters:
.I PMC[0-3], FIXC[0-2], PWR[0-3]. MBOX[0-3]C[0-3]
.IP \[bu] 
.B Intel Ivy Bridge:
full RAPL support. Counters:
.I PMC[0-3], FIXC[0-2], PWR[0-3]
.IP \[bu] 
.B Intel Ivy Bridge EP:
partial support for uncore, full RAPL support. Counters:
.I PMC[0-3], FIXC[0-2], PWR[0-3], CBOX[0-9]C[0-3], MBOX[0-3]C[0-3], MBOX[0-3]FIX, SBOX[0-1]C[0-3]
.IP \[bu] 
.B Intel Haswell:
full RAPL support. Counters:
.I PMC[0-3], FIXC[0-2], PWR[0-3]
.IP \[bu] 
.B Intel Haswell EP:
no uncore support, full RAPL support. Counters:
.I PMC[0-3], FIXC[0-2], PWR[0-3]
.IP \[bu] 
.B Intel Pentium M:
Banias and Dothan variants. Counters:
.I PMC[0-1]
.IP \[bu] 
.B Intel P6:
Tested on P3.
.IP \[bu] 
.B AMD K8:
all variants. Counters:
.I PMC[0-3]
.IP \[bu] 
.B AMD K10:
Barcelona, Shanghai, Istanbul, MagnyCours based processors. Counters:
.I PMC[0-3]

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\^v
prints version information to standard output, then exits.
.TP
.B \-\^h
prints a help message to standard output, then exits.
.TP
.B \-\^H
prints group help message (use together with -g switch).
.TP
.B \-\^V
verbose output during execution for debugging.
.TP
.B \-\^m
run in marker API mode
.TP
.B \-\^a
print available performance groups for current processor.
.TP
.B \-\^e
print available counters and performance events of current processor.
.TP
.B \-\^o " <filename>
store all ouput to a file instead of stdout. For the filename the following placeholders are supported: 
%j for PBS_JOBID, %r for MPI RANK (only Intel MPI at the moment), %h hostname and %p for process pid.
The placeholders must be separated by underscore as, e.g., -o test_%h_%p. You must specify a suffix to
the filename. For txt the output is printed as is to the file. Other suffixes trigger a filter on the output.
Available filters are csv (comma separated values) and xml at the moment.
.TP
.B \-\^O
Do not print tables for results, use easily parseable CSV instead.
.TP
.B \-\^i
print cpuid information about processor and on Intel Performance Monitoring features, then exit.
.TP
.B \-\^c " <processor_list>"
specify a numerical list of processors. The list may contain multiple 
items, separated by comma, and ranges. For example 0,3,9-11.
.TP
.B \-\^C " <processor_list>"
specify a numerical list of processors. The list may contain multiple 
items, separated by comma, and ranges. For example 0,3,9-11. This variant will
also pin the threads to the cores. Also logical numberings can be used.
.TP
.B \-\^g " <performance group> or <performance event set string>"
specify which performance group to measure. This can be one of the tags output with the -a flag.
Also a custom event set can be specified by a comma separated list of events. Each event has the format
eventId:register with the the register being one of a architecture supported performance counter registers.
.TP
.B \-\^t " <frequency of measurements>"
timeline mode for time resolved measurements, possible suffixes 's' and 'ms' like 100ms. The output has the format:
.TP
.B <Event> <Timestamp> <Result thread0> <Result thread1> ...
.TP
.B \-\^S " <time_in_seconds>"
stethoscope mode with duration in senconds. Can be used to measure an application from the outside.

.SH EXAMPLE
Because 
.B likwid-perfctr
measures on processors and not single applications it is necessary to ensure
that processes and threads are pinned to dedicated resources. You can either pin the application yourself
or use the builtin pin functionality.
.IP 1. 4
As wrapper with performance group:
.TP
.B likwid-perfctr -C 0-2 -g TLB ./cacheBench -n 2 -l 1048576 -i 100 -t Stream
.PP
The parent process is pinned to processor 0, Thread 0 to processor 1 and Thread 1 to processor 2.
.IP 2. 4
As wrapper with custom event set on AMD:
.TP
.B likwid-perfctr -C 0-4 -g INSTRUCTIONS_RETIRED_SSE:PMC0,CPU_CLOCKS_UNHALTED:PMC3 ./myApp
.PP
It is specified that the event
.B INSTRUCTIONS_RETIRED_SSE
is measured on counter
.B PMC0
and the event
.B CPU_CLOCKS_UNHALTED
on counter
.B PMC3.
It is possible calculate the runtime of all threads based on the
.B CPU_CLOCKS_UNHALTED
event. If you want this you have to include this event in your custom event string as shown above.

.IP 3. 4
As wrapper with custom event set on Intel:
.TP
.B likwid-perfctr -C 0 -g INSTR_RETIRED_ANY:FIXC0,CPU_CLK_UNHALTED_CORE:FIXC1 ./myApp
.PP
On Intel processors fixed events are measured on dedicated counters. These are
.B INSTR_RETIRED_ANY
,
.B CPU_CLK_UNHALTED_CORE.
and
.B CPU_CLK_UNHALTED_REF
If you configure these fixed counters, 
.B likwid-perfctr
will calculate the runtime and CPI metrics for your run.

.IP 4. 4
Using the marker API to measure only parts of your code (this can be used both with groups or custom event sets):
.TP
.B likwid-perfctr -m -C 0-4 -g INSTRUCTIONS_RETIRED_SSE:PMC0,CPU_CLOCKS_UNHALTED:PMC3 ./cacheBench
.PP
You have to link you code against liblikwid.a/.so and use the marker API calls.
The following code snippet shows the necessary calls:

.nf
#include <likwid.h>

/* only one thread calls init */
if (threadId == 0)
{
    likwid_markerInit();
}
/* if you want to measure an threaded application
 * you have to call likwid_markerThreadInit() for
 * preparation, example with OpenMP */
#pragma omp parallel
{
	likwid_markerThreadInit();
}
BARRIER;
likwid_markerStartRegion("Benchmark");
/* your code to be measured is here.*/

likwid_markerStopRegion("Benchmark");
BARRIER;
/* again only one thread can close the markers */
if (threadId == 0)
{
    likwid_markerClose();
}
.fi

.IP 5. 4
Using likwid in timeline mode:
.TP
.B likwid-perfctr -c 0-3 -g FLOPS_DP -t 300ms  ./myApp > out.txt
.PP
This will read out the counters every 300ms on physical cores 0-3 and write the results to out.txt.
For timeline mode there is a frontend application likwid-scope, which enables live plotting of selected events.
For more code examples have a look at the likwid WIKI pages. The processes are
.B not
pinned to the CPUs 0-3.

.IP 6. 4
Using likwid in stethoscope mode:
.TP
.B likwid-perfctr -c 0-3 -g FLOPS_DP -S 2s
.PP
This will start the counters and read them out after 2s on physical cores 0-3 and write the results to stdout. The processes are
.B not
pinned to the CPUs 0-3.

.SH AUTHOR
Written by Jan Treibig <jan.treibig@gmail.com>.
.SH BUGS
Report Bugs on <http://code.google.com/p/likwid/issues/list>.
.SH SEE ALSO
likwid-topology(1), likwid-features(1), likwid-pin(1), likwid-bench(1)
