.TH LIKWID-SETFREQUENCIES 1 <DATE> likwid\-<VERSION>
.SH NAME
likwid-setFrequencies \- print and manage the clock frequency of CPU cores
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B likwid-setFrequencies 
.RB [\-hpl]
.RB [ \-d
.IR domain ]
.RB [ \-g
.IR governor ]
.RB [ \-f
.IR frequency ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B likwid-setFrequencies
is a command line application to set the clock frequency of CPU cores. Since only priviledged users are allowed to change the frequency of CPU cores, the application works in combination with a daemon likwid-setFreq. The daemon needs the suid permission bit to be set in order to manipulate the sysfs entries. With likwid-setFrequencies the clock of all cores inside a affinity domain can be set to a specific frequency or governor at once.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-h
prints a help message to standard output, then exits.
.TP
.B \-p
prints the current frequencies for all CPU cores
.TP
.B \-l
prints all configurable frequencies
.TP
.B \-d
set the affinity domain where to set the frequencies. Common are N (Node), SX (Socket X), CX (Cache Group X) and MX (Memory Group X)
.TP
.B \-g
set the governor of all CPU cores inside the affinity domain. Current governors are ondemand, performance, turbo. Default is ondemand
.TP
.B \-f
set a fixed frequency at all CPU cores inside the affinity domain. Implicitly sets userspace governor for the cores.

.SH AUTHOR
Written by Thomas Roehl <thomas.roehl@gmail.com>.
.SH BUGS
Report Bugs on <http://code.google.com/p/likwid/issues/list>.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
likwid-perfCtr(1), likwid-features(1), likwid-pin(1), likwid-powermeter(1), likwid-topology(1),
