.TH LIKWID-POWERMETER 1 <DATE> likwid\-<VERSION>
.SH NAME
likwid-powermeter \- A tool to print power and clocking information on Intel CPUs
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B likwid-powermeter 
.RB [ \-vhip ]
.RB [ \-c
.IR <socket_list> ]
.RB [ \-s
.IR <duration_in_seconds> ]
.RB [ \-M
.IR <access_mode>]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B likwid-powermeter
is a command line application to get the energy comsumption of Intel RAPL capable processors. 
It also prints information about TDP and Turbo Mode steps supported.
The Turbo Mode information works on all Turbo mode enabled Intel processors. The tool can be either used
in stethoscope mode for a specified duration or as a wrapper to your application measuring your complete 
run. RAPL works on a per package (socket) base.
Please note that the RAPL counters are also accessible as normal events within
.B likwid-perfctr.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\^v
prints version information to standard output, then exits.
.TP
.B \-\^h
prints a help message to standard output, then exits.
.TP
.B \-\^c " <socket_list>"
set on which sockets the RAPL interface is accessed. comma-separated list of socket IDs
.TP
.B \-\^p
prints out information about dynamic clocks and CPI information on the socket measured. Uses likwid-perfctr internally.
.TP
.B \-\^i
prints out information TDP and Turbo mode steps
.TP
.B \-\^M " <access_mode>"
set the access method. 0 for direct access to MSR/RAPL registers, 1 for using the accessDaemon.
.TP
.B \-\^s " <duration_in_seconds>
measure the power for a specific time (default 2s)


.SH AUTHOR
Written by Jan Treibig <jan.treibig@gmail.com>.
.SH BUGS
Report Bugs on <http://code.google.com/p/likwid/issues/list>.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
likwid-topology(1), likwid-perfctr(1), likwid-pin(1), likwid-features(1), likwid-setFrequencies(1)
